# Pattern matching

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching



Induction of regular languages - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Induction_of_regular_languages

Pattern matching - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching

Pattern recognition - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_recognition

Regular expression - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression

Regular language - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_language

String-searching algorithm - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String-searching_algorithm



A Gentle Introduction to Haskell: Patterns
https://www.haskell.org/tutorial/patterns.html

pattern_matching - RDoc Documentation
https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/3.0/syntax/pattern_matching_rdoc.html

Pattern Syntax - The Rust Programming Language
https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch18-03-pattern-syntax.html

Pattern Matching | Tour of Scala | Scala Documentation
https://docs.scala-lang.org/tour/pattern-matching.html

Patterns | Documentation
https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/patterns/

Wayback Machine
https://web.archive.org/web/20131205193130/https://www.cs.nmsu.edu/historical-projects/Projects/kleene.9.16.10.pdf





## Refs

* Pattern matching - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching

* Conditional (computer programming) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conditional_(computer_programming)

* COMIT - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COMIT

* Hope (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hope_(programming_language)

* Matching wildcards - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matching_wildcards



* *John Reynolds and the invention of pattern matching*
http://trevorjim.com/john-reynolds-and-the-invention-of-pattern-matching/

* Wildcard matching algorithms
https://xoomer.virgilio.it/acantato/dev/wildcard/wildmatch.html

* Pattern matching, which language first had it - Retrocomputing Stack Exchange
https://retrocomputing.stackexchange.com/questions/4598/pattern-matching-which-language-first-had-it

* OCaml for the Skeptical: Pattern Matching
https://www2.lib.uchicago.edu/keith/ocaml-class/pattern-matching.html

* Pattern matching | Psychology Wiki | Fandom
https://psychology.fandom.com/wiki/Pattern_matching

* C# 7 - Pattern Matching | csharp-7 Tutorial
https://riptutorial.com/csharp-7/learn/100000/pattern-matching
