# Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs: JavaScript Edition 2022

## 1.1 The Elements of Programming

A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing a computer to perform tasks. The language also serves as a framework within which we organize our ideas about processes. Thus, when we describe a language, we should pay particular attention to the means it provides for combining simple ideas to form more complex ones. Every language has 3 mechanisms to accomplishing this:
1. *primitive expressions*: the simplest entities of the language
2. *means of combination*: compound elements are built from simpler ones
3. *means of abstraction*: naming compound elements to manipulate them as units

There are 2 fundamental entities in programming:
- *data* is what we want to manipulate
- *functions* are descriptions of the rules for manipulating the data

Thus, any PL should be able to describe primitive data and primitive functions and should have methods for combining and abstracting functions and data.

### 1.1.1 Expressions

One kind of statement is an expression statement, which consists of an expression followed by a semicolon. One kind of primitive expression is a literal number or numbers may be combined with operators. Expressions such as these, which contain other expressions as components, are called *combinations*.

Combinations that are formed by an operator symbol in the middle, and operand expressions to the left and right of it, are called *operator combinations*.

### 1.1.2 Naming and the Environment

A critical aspect of a programming language is the means it provides for using names to refer to computational objects, and our first such means are constants. We say that the name identifies a constant whose value is the object.

In JavaScript, we name constants with constant declarations. `const size = 2;` causes the interpreter to associate the value 2 with the name `size`. Once the name `size` has been associated with the number 2, we can refer to the value 2 by that name.

Constant declaration is a language's simplest means of abstraction, for it allows us to use simple names to refer to the results of compound operations.

The possibility of associating values with names and later retrieving them means that the interpreter must maintain some sort of memory that keeps track of the name-object pairs. This memory is called the *environment*.

### 1.1.3 Evaluating Operator Combinations

In evaluating operator combinations, the interpreter is itself following a procedure:
1. Evaluate the operand expressions of the combination
2. Apply the function that is denoted by the operator to the arguments that are the values of the operands

The first step dictates that in order to accomplish the evaluation process for a combination we must first perform the evaluation process on each operand of the combination. Thus, the evaluation rule is recursive in nature; that is, it includes, as one of its steps, the need to invoke the rule itself.

Viewing evaluation in terms of the tree, we can imagine that the values of the operands percolate upward, starting from the terminal nodes and then combining at higher and higher levels. In fact, the "percolate values upward" form of the evaluation rule is an example of a general kind of process known as *tree accumulation*.

Next, observe that the repeated application of the first step brings us to the point where we need to evaluate, not combinations, but primitive expressions such as numerals or names. We take care of the primitive cases by stipulating that the values of numerals are the numbers that they name, and the values of names are the objects associated with those names in the environment. The key point is the role of the environment in determining the meaning of the names in expressions.

Notice that the evaluation rule does not handle declarations, which contain keywords. Keywords carry a particular meaning, and thus cannot be used as names. A keyword or a combination of keywords in a statement instructs the interpreter to treat the statement in a special way. Each such *syntactic form* has its own evaluation rule. The various kinds of statements and expressions
(each with its associated evaluation rule) constitute the *syntax* of a PL.

### 1.1.4 Compound Functions

Declarations associate names with values providing a limited means of abstraction.

Evaluating the function declaration creates this compound function and associates it with the given name. That name is a symbol to be associated with the function definition in the environment. The parameters are the names used within the body of the function to refer to the corresponding arguments of the function. The return expression of the function will yield the value of the function application, when the parameters are replaced by the actual arguments to which the function is applied.

To evaluate a function application, the interpreter follows a procedure quite similar to the procedure for operator combinations:
1. Evaluate the subexpressions of the application, namely the function expression and the argument expressions.
2. Apply the function that is the value of the function expression to the values of the argument expressions.

Function application expressions can also serve as argument expressions.

A JavaScript environment provides primitive functions that are built into the interpreter. Besides the primitive functions provided by the operators, the JavaScript environment includes many mathematical primitive functions grouped in the `Math` object.

### 1.1.5 The Substitution Model for Function Application

To evaluate a function application, the interpreter evaluates the elements of the application and applies the function (which is the value of the function expression of the application) to the arguments (which are the values of the argument expressions of the application).

For compound functions, the application process is: To apply a compound function to arguments, first replace each formal parameter by the corresponding argument, and then evaluate the return expression of the function.

Evaluating function application involves: we must evaluate the function expression to get the function to be applied, and we must evaluate the argument expressions to get the arguments.

This process is called the *substitution model for function application*. It can be taken as a model that determines the "meaning" of function application.

However, there are two points that should be stressed:
* The purpose of the substitution is to help us think about function application, not to provide a description of how the interpreter really works. Typical interpreters do not evaluate function applications by manipulating the text of a function to substitute values for the parameters. In practice, the "substitution" is accomplished by using a local environment for the parameters.
* The substitution model is only one of many models; it is just a way to start thinking formally about the evaluation process. In face of mutable functions (functions with mutable data), the substitution model breaks down and must be replaced by a more complicated model of function application.

#### Applicative order versus normal order

The interpreter first evaluates the function expression, then argument expressions, and then applies the resulting function to the resulting arguments. This is the *applicative order* of evaluation.

An alternative evaluation model, called *normal order*, would not evaluate the arguments until their values are actually needed. It would first substitute argument expressions for formal parameters until it obtained an expression involving only operators and primitive functions, and would then perform the evaluation.

This alternative "fully expand and then reduce" evaluation method is called *normal-order evaluation*, in contrast to the "evaluate the arguments and then apply" method that the JS interpreter actually uses, which is called *applicative-order evaluation*.

For function applications, modeled using substitution and that yield legitimate values, normal-order and applicative-order evaluation produce the same value, i.e. they have the property of *confluence*.

JavaScript uses applicative-order evaluation also because normal order evaluation becomes much more complicated to deal with when we leave the realm of functions that can be modeled by substitution.

### 1.1.6 Conditional Expressions and Predicates

Case analysis can be written in JS using, possibly nested, ternary conditionals.

```js
const abs = x =>
  x === undefined
    ? null
    : x >= 0
      ? x
      : - x
```

`predicate ? consequent-expression : alternative-expression`

To evaluate a conditional expression, the interpreter starts by evaluating the predicate of the expression. If the predicate evaluates to true, the interpreter evaluates the consequent-expression and returns its value as the value of the conditional. If the predicate evaluates to false, it evaluates the alternative-expression and returns its value as the value of the conditional.

The general form of case analysis may be presented as

```js
predicate₁
  ? expression₁
: predicate₂
  ? expression₂
⁝
: predicateₙ
  ? expressionₙ
: final-alternative-expression
```

#### Switch statement

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/switch

The *switch statement* evaluates an `expression`, matching the expression's value to a `case` clause, and executes `statements` associated with that case, as well as statements in cases that follow the matching case, unless the case ends with the `break` statement.

```js
switch (input-exp) {
  case label-1:
      stmt_block-1
      [break]
  default     :
      stmt_block_default
}
```


```js
switch (input-exp) {
  case value-1:
    // Statements executed when the result of expression matches value1
    [stmt-block-1;]
    [break;]
  case value-2:
    // Statements executed when the result of expression matches value2
    [stmt-block-2;]
    [break;]
  ...
  case value-N:
    // Statements executed when the result of expression matches valueN
    [stmt-block-N;]
    [break;]
  default :
    // Statements executed when none of the values match the exp
    [stmt-block-default;]
}
```

```jsbnf
exp    := lit | bool | …
block  := stmt; [ stmt; ] …
bblock := { block }

switch := 'switch (' exp ')' bblock

exp
block
clause
stmt
case
label
value
break
default
```

A switch statement first evaluates <input-exp>.

It then looks for the first <case> clause whose expression (or <value>?) evaluates to the same value as the result of the <input-exp>, using the strict comparison `===`.

It then transfers control to that matching <clause>, executing the associated <stmt-block> (if any).

If multiple cases match the value of <input-exp>, the first case that matches is selected, even if the cases are not equal to each other.

If no matching case clause is found, the program looks for the optional <default> clause, and if found, transfers control to that clause, executing the optional statements, <stmt-block-default>.

If no default clause is found, the program continues execution at the statement following the end of switch.

By convention, the <default> clause is the last clause, but it does not need to be so.

The optional <break> statement associated with each case <label> ensures that the program breaks out of switch once the matched statement is executed and continues execution at the statement following switch.

If break is omitted, the program continues execution at the next statement in the switch statement. The break statement is not required if a return statement precedes it.

Examples

```js
// switch (1)
x = 3
switch (x) {
  case (1): ++x + 1; break
  case (2): ++x + 2; break
  case (3):
  case (4): ++x + 3; break
  default : x
}
// 7

// switch (2): fallthrough
x = 3
switch (x) {
  case (1): ++x + 1; break
  case (2): ++x + 2; break
  case (3):
  case (4): ++x + 3
  default : x
}
// 4

// switch (3)
x = 3
switch (x) {
  case (1): ++x + 1; break
  case (2): ++x + 2; break
  case (m => m < 7): ++x + 3; break
  default : x
}
```
