# CS :: Timeline :: Links

## History

* History of computing hardware
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_computing_hardware

* History of programming languages
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_programming_languages

* History of electronic engineering
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_electronic_engineering

## Timeline

* Timeline of computing
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_computing

* Timeline of quantum computing and communication
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_quantum_computing_and_communication

* Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_electrical_and_electronic_engineering

* Timeline of historic inventions
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_historic_inventions

* Timeline of heat engine technology
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_heat_engine_technology


## Category

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Computing_by_year
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Computer-related_introductions_by_year

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1937_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1938_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1999_in_computing

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1940s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1950s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1960s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1970s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1980s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1990s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:2000s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:2010s_in_computing
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:2020s_in_computing

- https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_computing_1950-1979


## Articles

* Begriffsschrift
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Begriffsschrift

* Electronics
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronics

* Computer History Museum
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_History_Museum

* Konrad Zuse
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Konrad%20Zuse
  - Z1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z1_(computer)
  - Z2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z2_(computer)
  - Z3 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z3_(computer)
  - Z4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z4_(computer)



* Weird machine - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weird_machine

* Subroutine - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subroutine

* Proof-carrying code - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof-carrying_code

* Plankalk√ºl - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plankalk%C3%BCl

* History of programming languages - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_programming_languages

* Begriffsschrift - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Begriffsschrift

* Superplan - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superplan

* ALGOL 58 - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ALGOL_58

* Begriffsschrift - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Begriffsschrift

* Floating-point arithmetic - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating-point_arithmetic

* History of computing hardware - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_computing_hardware

* History of computing hardware (1960s-present) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_computing_hardware_(1960s%E2%80%93present)

* History of computing - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_computing

* Computer hardware - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_hardware

* Timeline of computing - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_computing

* Timeline of computing hardware before 1950 - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_computing_hardware_before_1950

* Category:Computing timelines - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Computing_timelines
