# GPON

GPON (gigabit-capable passive optical network), is a standard for PON commonly used to implement the outermost link to the customer (the last mile) of FTTP services. GPON puts requirements on the optical medium and the hardware used to access it, and defines the manner in which ethernet frames are converted to an optical signal, as well as the parameters of that signal. Implementations of GPON share a lot of common features, but many were left undefined (exact kind of fibre cable and connectors), so there is poor compatibility between the various implementations in practice. The bandwidth of the single connection between the OLT and the ONTs is 2.4 Gbit/s for download, 1.2 Gbit/s for upload, shared between 32 (or 64 or 128) ONTs using a TDMA protocol defined by the standard. The upstream signals transmitted between a user and OLT only are not shared, but the downstream signals are broadcast to all users that share a fiber, so AES encryption is employed to prevent eavesdropping. Downstream and upstream can use the same fiber because they use different wave lengths. The primary optical transmitter, aka the OLT, is housed at the provider. A laser in the OLT injects photons into a glass-and-plastic (which have different diffraction indices so that light bounces and stays within the glass) fiber-optic cable that terminates at a passive optical splitter. The splitter divides the single signal from the provider into user signals. The maximum distance between the provider and a user is 16 km.
