# x86 32-bit

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IA-32

IA32

## Architectural features

The primary defining characteristic of IA-32 is the availability of
- 32-bit general-purpose processor registers (for example, EAX and EBX)
- 32-bit integer arithmetic and logical operations
- 32-bit offsets within a segment in protected mode
- 32-bit linear addresses - translation of segmented addresses

The designers took the opportunity to make other improvements as well. Some of the most significant changes (relative to the 16-bit 286 instruction set) are:

### 32-bit integer capability

- All general-purpose registers (GPRs) are expanded from 16 bits to 32 bits.
- All arithmetic and logical operations, memory-to-register and register-to-memory operations, etc., can operate directly on 32-bit integers.
- Pushes and pops on the stack default to *4-byte strides*
- non-segmented pointers are *4 bytes wide*

### More general addressing modes

Any GPR can be used as a base register, and 
any GPR other than ESP can be used as an index register, in a memory reference.

The index register value can be multiplied by 1, 2, 4, or 8 before being added to the base register value and displacement.

### Additional segment registers

Two additional segment registers, FS and GS, are provided.

### Larger virtual address space

The IA-32 architecture defines a *48-bit segmented address format*, 
with a 16-bit segment number 
and a 32-bit offset within the segment. 
Segmented addresses are mapped to 32-bit linear addresses.

### Demand paging

32-bit linear addresses are virtual addresses rather than physical addresses; they are translated to physical addresses through a page table.

In the 80386, 80486, and the original Pentium processors, 
the physical address was 32 bits; 
in the Pentium Pro and later processors, 
the Physical Address Extension allowed 36-bit physical addresses, 
although the linear address size was still 32 bits.
