# Database Theory: Outline

* Database theory
  2. Types of databases
  3. History of databases
  4. Database use
    4.1 Database languages
    4.2 Database security
    4.3 Database design
    4.4 Database programming
    4.5 Database management
  5. Database management systems
    5.1 Concepts
    5.2 Objects
    5.3 Components
    5.4 Functions
    5.5 Database products
  6. Database models
    6.1 Models
    6.2 Other models
    6.3 Implementations
  7. Data Warehouse
    7.1 Creating the data warehouse
      7.1.1 Concepts
      7.1.2 Variants
      7.1.3 Elements
      7.1.4 Fact
      7.1.5 Dimension
      7.1.6 Filling
    7.2 Using the data warehouse
      7.2.1 Concepts
      7.2.2 Languages
      7.2.3 Tools
    7.3 People
    7.4 Products
  8. Database-related organizations
  9. Database-related publications
  10. Database scholars


---


* [Database theory][92] – encapsulates a broad range of topics related to the study and research of the theoretical realm of databases and database management systems.
* [Database machine][93] – or is a computer or special hardware that stores and retrieves data from a database. Also called a "back end processor"
* [Database server][94] – computer program that provides database services to other computer programs or computers, as defined by the client-server model.
* [Database application][95] – computer program whose primary purpose is entering and retrieving information from a computer-managed database. 
    * [Database management system][96] (DBMS) – software package with computer programs that control the creation, maintenance, and use of a database.
* [Database connection][97] – facility in computer science that allows client software to communicate with database server software, whether on the same machine or not. 
    * [Datasource][98] – name given to the connection set up to a database from a server. The name is commonly used when creating a query to the database. The Database Source Name (DSN) does not have to be the same as the filename for the database. For example, a database file named "friends.mdb" could be set up with a DSN of "school". Then DSN "school" would then be used to refer to the database when performing a query.
    * [Data Source Name][99] (DSN) – are data structures used to describe a connection to a data source. Sometimes known as a database source name though data sources are not limited to databases.
* [Database administrator][100] (DBA) – is a person responsible for the installation, configuration, upgrade, administration, monitoring and maintenance of physical[[_clarification needed][101]_] databases.
* [Lock][102] –
* [Comparison of database tools][103] – (provides tables for comparing general and technical information for a number of available database administrator tools.)
* [Database-centric architecture][104] – software architectures in which databases play a crucial role. Also called "data-centric architecture".
* [Intelligent database][105] – was put forward as a system that manages information (rather than data) in a way that appears natural to users and which goes beyond simple record keeping.
* [Two-phase locking][106] (2PL) – is a concurrency control method that guarantees serializability.
* [Locks with ordered sharing][107] – comprises several variants of the _Two phase locking_ (2PL) concurrency control protocol generated by changing the blocking semantics of locks upon conflicts.
* [Load file][108] – in the litigation community is commonly referred to as the file used to import data (coded, captured or extracted data from ESI processing) into a database; or the file used to link images.
* [Database publishing][109] – area of automated media production in which specialized techniques are used to generate paginated documents from source data residing in traditional databases.
* [Halloween Problem][110] – a phenomenon in databases in which an update operation causes a change in the physical location of a row, potentially allowing the row to be visited more than once during the operation.
* [Log shipping][111] – process of automating the backup of a database and transaction log files on a primary (production) database server, and then restoring them onto a standby server.

* Database languages
  * Data definition language
  * Data manipulation language
  * Query language
    * [Information retrieval query language][117] – query language used to make queries into database, where the semantics of the query are defined not by a precise rendering of a formal syntax, but by an interpretation of the most suitable results of the query.
    *[SQL
    
    [118] (Structured Query Language) – special-purpose programming language designed for managing data held in a relational database management system (RDBMS), or for stream processing in a relational data stream management system (RDSMS).

### Database security[[edit][119]]

[Database security][120] – 

* [Database activity monitoring][121] (DAM) – database security technology for monitoring and analyzing database activity that operates independently of the database management system (DBMS) and does not rely on any form of native (DBMS-resident) auditing or native logs such as trace or transaction logs.
* [Database audit][122] –
* [Database forensics][123] – branch of digital forensic science relating to the forensic study of databases and their related metadata.
* [Negative database][124] – credit card terminology for a list of credit card owners who chargeback a lot.

### Database design[[edit][125]]

[Database design][126] – 

* [Entity-relationship model][127] (ER model) – abstract and conceptual representation of data.
* [Database normalization][128] – process of organizing the fields and tables of a relational database to minimize redundancy and dependency.
* [Database refactoring][129] – simple change to a database schema that improves its design while retaining both its behavioral and informational semantics.

### Database programming[[edit][130]]

* [Database abstraction layer][131] – application programming interface which unifies the communication between a computer application and databases such as SQL Server, DB2, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle or SQLite.
* [Object-relational mapping][132] (ORM, O/RM, and O/R mapping) – in computer software is a programming technique for converting data between incompatible type systems in object-oriented programming languages.

### Database management[[edit][133]]

* [Database virtualization][134] – it is the decoupling of the database layer, which lies between the storage and application layers within the application stack.
* [Database tuning][135] – describes a group of activities used to optimize and homogenize the performance of a database. 
    * [Database caching][136] – effective approach to achieve high scalability and performance.
* [Data migration#Database migration][137] –
* [Database preservation][138] – usually involves converting the information stored in a database, without losing the characteristics (Context, Content, Structure, Appearance and Behaviour) of the data, to a format which can be used in the long term, even if the technology and daily life knowledge changes.
* [Database integrity][139] – ensures that data entered into the database is accurate, valid, and consistent.

## Database management systems[[edit][140]]

[Database management system][96] – 

* [Database model][141] –
* [Database normalization][128] – organizing tables based on their attributes so that the data presented can avoid having redundancy and dependency.
* [Database storage structures][142] –
* [Distributed database management system][143] –
* [Federated database system][144] – type of meta-database management system (DBMS), which transparently maps multiple autonomous database systems into a single federated database.
* [Referential integrity][145] – .
* [Relational algebra][146] – offshoot of first-order logic (and of algebra of sets), deals with a set of finitary relations (see also relation (database)) that is closed under certain operators.
* [Relational calculus][147] – consists of two calculi, the tuple relational calculus and the domain relational calculus, that are part of the relational model for databases and provide a declarative way to specify database queries.
* [Relational database][77] – collection of data items organized as a set of formally described tables from which data can be accessed easily.
* [Relational database management system][148] (RDBMS) – database management system (DBMS) that is based on the relational model as introduced by E.
* [Relational model][149] – for database management is a database model based on first-order predicate logic, first formulated and proposed in 1969 by Edgar F.
* [Object-relational database][150] (ORD) – database management system (DBMS) similar to a relational database, but with an object-oriented database model: objects, classes and inheritance are directly supported in database schemas and in the query language. Also called object-relational database management system (ORDBMS).
* [Transaction processing][151] –

### Concepts[[edit][152]]

* [Database][2] – organized collection of data, today typically in digital form.
* [ACID][153] – (_atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability_) is a set of properties that guarantee that database transactions are processed reliably.
* [Create, read, update and delete][154] (CRUD) – are the four basic functions of persistent storage.
* [Null][155] –
* [Candidate key][156] – minimal superkey for a relation.
* [Foreign key][157] – referential constraint between two tables.
* [Primary key][158] –
* [Superkey][159] – set of attributes of a relation variable for which it holds that in all relations assigned to that variable, there are no two distinct tuples (rows) that have the same values for the attributes in this set.
* [Surrogate key][160] – unique identifier in a database for either an _entity_ in the modeled world or an _object_ in the database.
* [Armstrong's axioms][161] – set of axioms (or, more precisely, inference rules) used to infer all the functional dependencies on a relational database.
* [NoSQL][162] – class of database management system identified by its non-adherence to the widely used relational database management system (RDBMS) model:

### Objects[[edit][163]]

* [Relation][164] – 
    * [Table][165] –
    * [Column][166] –
    * [Row][167] –
* [View][168] –
* [Database transaction][169] –
* [Transaction log][170] – history of actions executed by a database management system to guarantee ACID properties over crashes or hardware failures. Also called "transaction journal", "database log" or "binary log".
* [Database trigger][171] – procedural code that is automatically executed in response to certain events on a particular table or view in a database.
* [Index][172] –
* [Stored procedure][173] – subroutine available to applications that access a relational database system.
* [Cursor][174] –
* [Partition][175] –

### Components[[edit][176]]

* [Concurrency control][177] – ensures that correct results for concurrent operations are generated, while getting those results as quickly as possible.
* [Data dictionary][178] – as defined in the _IBM Dictionary of Computing_, is a "centralized repository of information about data such as meaning, relationships to other data, origin, usage, and format." Also called a "metadata repository".
* [Java Database Connectivity][179] – .
* [Open Database Connectivity][180] –
* [Query language][116] –
* [Query optimizer][181] – component of a database management system that attempts to determine the most efficient way to execute a query.
* [Query plan][182] – ordered set of steps used to access or modify information in a SQL relational database management system. Also called a "query execution plan".

### Functions[[edit][183]]

* [Database administration and automation][184] –
* [Query optimization][185] – function of many relational database management systems in which multiple query plans for satisfying a query are examined and a good query plan is identified.
* [Database replication][186] –

### Database products[[edit][187]]

* [List of object-oriented database management systems][188] – 
    * [Comparison of object-relational database management systems][189] –
* [List of relational database management systems][190] – 
    * [Comparison of relational database management systems][191] –
    * [MySQL][192] ([outline][193]) –
* [Document-oriented database][61] – computer program designed for storing, retrieving, and managing document-oriented, or Semi-structured model|semi structured data, information.

## Database models[[edit][194]]

* [Database model][141] – theoretical foundation of a database and fundamentally determines in which manner data can be stored, organized, and manipulated in a database system. It thereby defines the infrastructure offered by a particular database system. The most popular example of a database model is the relational model.

### Models[[edit][195]]

* [Flat file database][196] – various means to encode a database model (most commonly a table) as a single file.
* [Hierarchical database model][197] – data model in which the data is organized into a tree-like structure.
* [Database model#Dimensional model][198] –
* [Network model][199] – database model conceived as a flexible way of representing objects and their relationships.
* [Relational model][149] –
* [Entity-relationship model][127] –
* [Graph database][67] – uses graph structures with nodes, edges, and properties to represent and store data.
* [Object database][200] – database management system in which information is represented in the form of objects as used in object-oriented programming. Also called an "object-oriented database management system".
* [Entity-attribute-value model][201] –

### Other models[[edit][202]]

* [Associative model of data][203] – alternative data model for database systems.
* [Online analytical processing#Multidimensional databases][204] –
* [Semantic data model][205] –
* [Star schema][206] – is the simplest style of data warehouse schema. Also called "star-join schema", "data cube", or "multi-dimensional schema".
* [XML database][86] –

### Implementations[[edit][207]]

* [Flat file database][196] –
* [Deductive database][208] – database system that can make deductions.
* [Document-oriented database][61] –
* [Object-relational database][150] –
* [Temporal database][79] – database with built-in time aspects, for example a temporal data model and a temporal version of Structured Query Language (SQL).
* [XML database][86] –
* [Triplestore][81] – purpose-built database for the storage and retrieval of triples, a triple being a data entity composed of subject-predicate-object, like "Bob is 35" or "Bob knows Fred".

## Data warehouse[[edit][209]]

[Data warehouse][210] – 

### Creating the data warehouse[[edit][211]]

#### Concepts[[edit][212]]

* [Dimension][213] –
* [Dimensional modeling][214] (DM) – is the name of a set of techniques and concepts used in data warehouse design.
* [Fact][215] –
* [Online analytical processing][216] (OLAP) – or is an approach to swiftly answer multi-dimensional analytical (multi-dimensional analytical|MDA) queries.
* [Star schema][206] –
* [Aggregate][217] –

#### Variants[[edit][218]]

* [Anchor Modeling][219] –
* [Column-oriented DBMS][220] – database management system (DBMS) that stores data tables as sections of columns of data rather than as rows of data, like most relational DBMSs.
* [Data Vault Modeling][221] –
* [HOLAP][222] –
* [MOLAP][223] – stands for Multidimensional Online Analytical Processing.
* [ROLAP][224] – stands for Relational Online Analytical Processing.
* [Operational data store][225] (ODS) – database designed to integrate data from multiple sources for additional operations on the data.

#### Elements[[edit][226]]

* [Data dictionary][178] – /[Metadata][227] –
* [Data mart][228] – access layer of the data warehouse environment that is used to get data out to the users.
* [Sixth normal form][229] (6NF) – term in relational database theory, used in two different ways.
* [Surrogate key][160] –

#### Fact[[edit][230]]

* [Fact table][231] – consists of the measurements, metrics or facts of a business process.
* [Early-arriving fact][232] –
* [Measure][233] –

#### Dimension[[edit][234]]

* [Dimension table][235] – one of the set of companion tables to a fact table.
* [Degenerate dimension][236] – dimension key in the fact table that does not have its own dimension table, because all the interesting attributes have been placed in analytic dimensions.
* [Slowly changing dimension][237] –

#### Filling[[edit][238]]

* [Extract-Transform-Load (ETL)][239] –
* [Data extraction][240] – act or process of retrieving data out of (usually unstructured or poorly structured) data sources for further data processing or data storage (data migration).
* [Data transformation][241] – converts data from a source data format into destination data.
* [Data loading][242] –

### Using the data warehouse[[edit][243]]

#### Concepts[[edit][244]]

* [Business intelligence][245] (BI) – is defined as the ability for an organization to take all its capabilities and convert them into knowledge, ultimately, getting the right information to the right people, at the right time, via the right channel.
* [Dashboard][246] –
* [Data mining][247] – is the process that results in the discovery of new patterns in large data sets. It is the analysis step of the "Knowledge Discovery in Databases" process, or KDD.
* [Decision support system (DSS)][248] –
* [OLAP cube][249] – set of data, organized in a way that facilitates non-predetermined queries for aggregated information, or in other words, online analytical processing.

#### Languages[[edit][250]]

* [Data Mining Extensions][251] (DMX) –
* [MultiDimensional eXpressions][252] (MDX) –
* [XML for Analysis][253] (XMLA) –

#### Tools[[edit][254]]

* [Business intelligence tools][255] –
* [List of reporting software][256] –
* [Spreadsheets][257] –

### People[[edit][258]]

* [Bill Inmon][259] –
* [Ralph Kimball][260] (Born 1944) – author on the subject of data warehousing and business intelligence.

### Products[[edit][261]]

* [Comparison of OLAP Servers][262] –

## Database-related organizations[[edit][263]]

* [_Database][264]_
* [_Journal of Database Management][265]_

## Database-related publications[[edit][266]]

* Ling Liu and Tamer M. Özsu (Eds.) (2009). "[Encyclopedia of Database Systems][267], 4100 p. 60 illus. [ISBN][268] [978-0-387-49616-0][269]. Table of Content available at 
* Beynon-Davies, P. (2004). Database Systems. 3rd Edition. Palgrave, Houndmills, Basingstoke.
* Connolly, Thomas and Carolyn Begg. _Database Systems._ New York: Harlow, 2002.
* [Date, C. J.][270] (2003). _An Introduction to Database Systems, Fifth Edition_. Addison Wesley. [ISBN][268] [0-201-51381-1][271].
* Gray, J. and Reuter, A. _Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques_, 1st edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1992.
* Kroenke, David M. and David J. Auer. _Database Concepts._ 3rd ed. New York: Prentice, 2007.
* Lightstone, S.; Teorey, T.; Nadeau, T. (2007). _Physical Database Design: the database professional's guide to exploiting indexes, views, storage, and more_. Morgan Kaufmann Press. [ISBN][268] [0-12-369389-6][272].
* Teorey, T.; Lightstone, S. and Nadeau, T. _Database Modeling & Design: Logical Design_, 4th edition, Morgan Kaufmann Press, 2005. [ISBN][268] [0-12-685352-5][273]

## Database scholars[[edit][274]]

* [Serge Abiteboul][275]
* [David Maier][276]
* [Ralph Kimball][260]
* [Kamran Parsaye][277]
* [C. J. Date][278]




## See also
* [Outline of computing][280]
* [Outline of software][281]
* [Database model][141]
* [Database schema][282]
* [Record (database)][283]
* [Key (database)][284]
* [Internet research][285]
* [List of academic databases and search engines][286]
* [List of biodiversity databases][287]
* [List of Internet forums][288]
* [List of online databases][289]




---

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_(list) "Outline (list)"
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database "Database"
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data "Data"
[88]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database#History "Database"
[89]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_management_system#History "Database management system"
[91]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database#Major_database_usage_requirements "Database"
[92]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_theory "Database theory"
[93]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_machine "Database machine"
[94]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_server "Database server"
[95]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_application "Database application"
[96]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_management_system "Database management system"
[97]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_connection "Database connection"
[98]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datasource "Datasource"
[99]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_Source_Name "Data Source Name"
[100]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_administrator "Database administrator"
[101]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Please_clarify "Wikipedia:Please clarify"
[102]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lock_(database) "Lock (database)"
[103]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_database_tools "Comparison of database tools"
[104]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database-centric_architecture "Database-centric architecture"
[105]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_database "Intelligent database"
[106]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two-phase_locking "Two-phase locking"
[107]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locks_with_ordered_sharing "Locks with ordered sharing"
[108]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Load_file "Load file"
[109]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_publishing "Database publishing"
[110]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halloween_Problem "Halloween Problem"
[111]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Log_shipping "Log shipping"
[113]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database#Database_languages "Database"
[114]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_definition_language "Data definition language"
[115]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_manipulation_language "Data manipulation language"
[116]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Query_language "Query language"
[117]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_retrieval_query_language "Information retrieval query language"
[118]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL "SQL"
[120]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_security "Database security"
[121]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_activity_monitoring "Database activity monitoring"
[122]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_audit "Database audit"
[123]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_forensics "Database forensics"
[124]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negative_database "Negative database"
[126]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_design "Database design"
[127]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity-relationship_model "Entity-relationship model"
[128]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_normalization "Database normalization"
[129]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_refactoring "Database refactoring"
[131]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_abstraction_layer "Database abstraction layer"
[132]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-relational_mapping "Object-relational mapping"
[134]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_virtualization "Database virtualization"
[135]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_tuning "Database tuning"
[136]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_caching "Database caching"
[137]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_migration#Database_migration "Data migration"
[138]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_preservation "Database preservation"
[139]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_integrity "Database integrity"
[141]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_model "Database model"
[142]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_storage_structures "Database storage structures"
[143]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_database_management_system "Distributed database management system"
[144]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federated_database_system "Federated database system"
[145]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Referential_integrity "Referential integrity"
[146]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_algebra "Relational algebra"
[147]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_calculus "Relational calculus"
[148]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_database_management_system "Relational database management system"
[149]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_model "Relational model"
[150]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-relational_database "Object-relational database"
[151]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_processing "Transaction processing"
[153]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID "ACID"
[154]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete "Create, read, update and delete"
[155]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_(SQL) "Null (SQL)"
[156]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candidate_key "Candidate key"
[157]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_key "Foreign key"
[158]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_key "Primary key"
[159]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superkey "Superkey"
[160]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surrogate_key "Surrogate key"
[161]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armstrong%27s_axioms "Armstrong's axioms"
[162]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL "NoSQL"
[164]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relation_(database) "Relation (database)"
[165]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Table_(database) "Table (database)"
[166]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Column_(database) "Column (database)"
[167]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Row_(database) "Row (database)"
[168]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/View_(database) "View (database)"
[169]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_transaction "Database transaction"
[170]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_log "Transaction log"
[171]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_trigger "Database trigger"
[172]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Index_(database) "Index (database)"
[173]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stored_procedure "Stored procedure"
[174]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cursor_(databases) "Cursor (databases)"
[175]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database) "Partition (database)"
[177]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concurrency_control "Concurrency control"
[178]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_dictionary "Data dictionary"
[179]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Database_Connectivity "Java Database Connectivity"
[180]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Database_Connectivity "Open Database Connectivity"
[181]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Query_optimizer "Query optimizer"
[182]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Query_plan "Query plan"
[184]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_administration_and_automation "Database administration and automation"
[185]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Query_optimization "Query optimization"
[186]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_replication "Database replication"
[188]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_object-oriented_database_management_systems "List of object-oriented database management systems"
[189]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_object-relational_database_management_systems "Comparison of object-relational database management systems"
[190]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_relational_database_management_systems "List of relational database management systems"
[191]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_relational_database_management_systems "Comparison of relational database management systems"
[192]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MySQL "MySQL"
[193]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_of_MySQL "Outline of MySQL"
[196]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flat_file_database "Flat file database"
[197]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_database_model "Hierarchical database model"
[198]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_model#Dimensional_model "Database model"
[199]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_model "Network model"
[200]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_database "Object database"
[201]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity-attribute-value_model "Entity-attribute-value model"

[203]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_model_of_data "Associative model of data"
[204]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_analytical_processing#Multidimensional_databases "Online analytical processing"
[205]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_data_model "Semantic data model"
[206]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_schema "Star schema"
[208]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deductive_database "Deductive database"
[210]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_warehouse "Data warehouse"
[213]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimension_(data_warehouse) "Dimension (data warehouse)"
[214]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimensional_modeling "Dimensional modeling"
[215]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fact_(data_warehouse) "Fact (data warehouse)"
[216]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_analytical_processing "Online analytical processing"
[217]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aggregate_(Data_Warehouse) "Aggregate (Data Warehouse)"
[219]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchor_Modeling "Anchor Modeling"
[220]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Column-oriented_DBMS "Column-oriented DBMS"
[221]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_Vault_Modeling "Data Vault Modeling"
[222]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HOLAP "HOLAP"
[223]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MOLAP "MOLAP"
[224]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ROLAP "ROLAP"
[225]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_data_store "Operational data store"
[227]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metadata "Metadata"
[228]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_mart "Data mart"
[229]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sixth_normal_form "Sixth normal form"
[231]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fact_table "Fact table"
[232]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Early-arriving_fact "Early-arriving fact"
[233]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Measure_(data_warehouse) "Measure (data warehouse)"
[235]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimension_table "Dimension table"
[236]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degenerate_dimension "Degenerate dimension"
[237]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slowly_changing_dimension "Slowly changing dimension"
[239]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extract,_transform,_load "Extract, transform, load"
[240]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_extraction "Data extraction"
[241]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_transformation "Data transformation"
[242]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_loading "Data loading"
[245]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_intelligence "Business intelligence"
[246]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dashboard_(business) "Dashboard (business)"
[247]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_mining "Data mining"
[248]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_support_system "Decision support system"
[249]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLAP_cube "OLAP cube"
[251]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_Mining_Extensions "Data Mining Extensions"
[252]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MultiDimensional_eXpressions "MultiDimensional eXpressions"
[253]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_for_Analysis "XML for Analysis"
[255]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_intelligence_tools "Business intelligence tools"
[256]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_reporting_software "List of reporting software"


[259]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_Inmon "Bill Inmon"
[260]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ralph_Kimball "Ralph Kimball"
[275]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serge_Abiteboul "Serge Abiteboul"
[276]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Maier "David Maier"
[278]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C._J._Date "C. J. Date"


[282]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_schema "Database schema"
[283]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Record_(database) "Record (database)"
[284]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key_(database) "Key (database)"


[285]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_research "Internet research"
[286]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_academic_databases_and_search_engines "List of academic databases and search engines"
[289]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_online_databases "List of online databases"


[280]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_of_computing "Outline of computing"
[281]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_of_software "Outline of software"


[262]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_OLAP_Servers "Comparison of OLAP Servers"
[268]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number"
[264]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_(journal) "Database (journal)"
[265]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Journal_of_Database_Management "Journal of Database Management"
[267]: https://www.springer.com/computer/database+management+&+information+retrieval/book/978-0-387-49616-0
