# Virtual method table

* Polymorphism
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)

* Virtual method table
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_method_table

- C++ FAQ: Virtual functions
https://www.parashift.com/c++-faq-lite/virtual-functions.html
  - FAQ: What is a "virtual member function"?
  - FAQ: How can C++ achieve dynamic binding yet also static typing?
  - FAQ: Difference between calling virtual and non-virtual member functions?
  - FAQ: Implementation details and efficiency of calling a virtual function?
  - FAQ: How can a member function in my derived class call the same function from its base class?
  - FAQ: Using dynamic binding with objects in heterogeneous containers?
  - FAQ: When should my destructor be virtual?
  - FAQ: What is a "virtual constructor"?

* Polymorphism
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)

* Understandig Virtual Tables in C++
https://pabloariasal.github.io/2017/06/10/understanding-virtual-tables/

* V-tables differences between Rust and C
https://users.rust-lang.org/t/v-tables-differences-between-rust-and-c/92445

* Classes part 18 - Understanding the vtable | Modern Cpp Series Ep. 54
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hS7kPtVB1vI

* Fast Virtual Functions: Hacking the VTable for Fun and Profit
https://medium.com/@calebleak/fast-virtual-functions-hacking-the-vtable-for-fun-and-profit-25c36409c5e0

* vTable And vPtr in C++
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/vtable-and-vptr-in-cpp/

* Polymorphism in C++: Understanding The Concepts
https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/cpp-tutorial/polymorphism-in-cpp

* Difference between Compile-time and Run-time Polymorphism in Java
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/difference-between-compile-time-and-run-time-polymorphism-in-java/

https://www.javatpoint.com/runtime-polymorphism-in-java

https://users.rust-lang.org/t/rust-runtime-polymorphism/70852

https://www.ituonline.com/tech-definitions/what-is-runtime-polymorphism/




## Virtual functions

- Virtual functions (C++ only)
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/zos/2.3.0?topic=only-virtual-functions-c

- What is the difference between Early and Late Binding?
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10580/what-are-early-and-late-binding

- How VIRTUAL functions work in C++
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FncNE2vdtwQ&list=TLPQMTEwMTIwMjW9lyPglQe8JQ&index=2

- Virtual functions in C++
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/virtual-function-cpp/

- why do we need virtual functions in C++
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2391679/why-do-we-need-virtual-functions-in-c

- 25.6 The virtual table
https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/the-virtual-table/

- Inheritance Is The Base Class of Evil
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bIhUE5uUFOA

- What is the purpose of virtual member functions?
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2238928/what-is-the-purpose-of-virtual-member-functions?rq=3

- Why use virtual functions? [duplicate]
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/8824359/why-use-virtual-functions?noredirect=1&lq=1

- C++ Virtual Functions and Function Overriding
https://www.programiz.com/cpp-programming/virtual-functions

- Virtual Function in C++: Everything You Need to Know
https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/cpp-tutorial/virtual-function-in-cpp

- Classes part 16 - Virtual Functions (Dynamic dispatch) | Modern Cpp Series Ep. 52
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BuWehV6sD1c&list=PLvv0ScY6vfd8j-tlhYVPYgiIyXduu6m-L&index=52

- LEARN C++ - Early binding and late binding
https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/early-binding-and-late-binding/



* PolyConf 15: Cello - Hacking C for Fun and Learning / Daniel Holden
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bVxfwsgO00o

* C++ Playlist (250 videos)
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLvv0ScY6vfd8j-tlhYVPYgiIyXduu6m-L
