# Computing :: (PAGES)

[Command-line argument](./command-line-argument.md)
[Command line](./command-line.md)
[Command](./command.md)
[File descriptor](./file-descriptor.md)
[POSIX](./posix.md)
[Standard error](./standard-error.md)
[Standard input](./standard-input.md)
[Standard output](./standard-output.md)
[Unix pipe](./unix-pipe.md)


* Stream (computing) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stream_(computing)
* Standard streams - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams
* Sink (computing) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sink_(computing)

* File system - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_system
* Fork (file system) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork_(file_system)
* NTFS - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NTFS#Alternate_data_stream_(ADS)


* Shell (computing) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_(computing)
* System console - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_console
* Computer terminal - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_terminal#Text_terminals
* Redirection (computing) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redirection_(computing)
* Pipeline (Unix) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pipeline_(Unix)

* Input/output - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input/output
* Memory-mapped I/O - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory-mapped_I/O
* Communication channel - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communication_channel

* Parent process - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parent_process
* Child process - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Child_process

* Command-line interface - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface
* Graphical user interface - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface
* Zooming user interface - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zooming_user_interface
* Crossing-based interface - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crossing-based_interface
* Text-based user interface - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text-based_user_interface



* Comparison of command shells - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_command_shells
* Unix shell - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_shell
* Shell builtin - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_builtin
